



                               a case of identity

                               arthur conan doyle



     "my dear fellow," said sherlock holmes as we sat on either side of
     the fire in his lodgings at baker street, "life is infinitely
     stranger than anything which the mind of man could invent. we would
     not dare to conceive the things which are really mere commonplaces of
     existence. if we could fly out of that window hand in hand, hover
     over this great city, gently remove the roofs, and peep in at the
     queer things which are going on, the strange coincidences, the
     plannings, the cross-purposes, the wonderful chains of events,
     working through generations, and leading to the most outré results,
     it would make all fiction with its conventionalities and foreseen
     conclusions most stale and unprofitable."

     "and yet i am not convinced of it," i answered. "the cases which come
     to light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar
     enough. we have in our police reports realism pushed to its extreme
     limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neither
     fascinating nor artistic."

     "a certain selection and discretion must be used in producing a
     realistic effect," remarked holmes. "this is wanting in the police
     report, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes of
     the magistrate than upon the details, which to an observer contain
     the vital essence of the whole matter. depend upon it, there is
     nothing so unnatural as the commonplace."

     i smiled and shook my head. "i can quite understand your thinking
     so." i said. "of course, in your position of unofficial adviser and
     helper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled, throughout three
     continents, you are brought in contact with all that is strange and
     bizarre. but here"--i picked up the morning paper from the
     ground--"let us put it to a practical test. here is the first heading
     upon which i come. 'a husband's cruelty to his wife.' there is half a
     column of print, but i know without reading it that it is all
     perfectly familiar to me. there is, of course, the other woman, the
     drink, the push, the blow, the bruise, the sympathetic sister or
     landlady. the crudest of writers could invent nothing more crude."

     "indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument," said
     holmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it. "this is the
     dundas separation case, and, as it happens, i was engaged in clearing
     up some small points in connection with it. the husband was a
     teetotaler, there was no other woman, and the conduct complained of
     was that he had drifted into the habit of winding up every meal by
     taking out his false teeth and hurling them at his wife, which, you
     will allow, is not an action likely to occur to the imagination of
     the average story-teller. take a pinch of snuff, doctor, and
     acknowledge that i have scored over you in your example."

     he held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in the
     centre of the lid. its splendour was in such contrast to his homely
     ways and simple life that i could not help commenting upon it.

     "ah," said he, "i forgot that i had not seen you for some weeks. it
     is a little souvenir from the king of bohemia in return for my
     assistance in the case of the irene adler papers."

     "and the ring?" i asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant which
     sparkled upon his finger.

     "it was from the reigning family of holland, though the matter in
     which i served them was of such delicacy that i cannot confide it
     even to you, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of my
     little problems."

     "and have you any on hand just now?" i asked with interest.

     "some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest.
     they are important, you understand, without being interesting.
     indeed, i have found that it is usually in unimportant matters that
     there is a field for the observation, and for the quick analysis of
     cause and effect which gives the charm to an investigation. the
     larger crimes are apt to be the simpler, for the bigger the crime the
     more obvious, as a rule, is the motive. in these cases, save for one
     rather intricate matter which has been referred to me from
     marseilles, there is nothing which presents any features of interest.
     it is possible, however, that i may have something better before very
     many minutes are over, for this is one of my clients, or i am much
     mistaken."

     he had risen from his chair and was standing between the parted
     blinds gazing down into the dull neutral-tinted london street.
     looking over his shoulder, i saw that on the pavement opposite there
     stood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck, and a large
     curling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in a
     coquettish duchess of devonshire fashion over her ear. from under
     this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion at
     our windows, while her body oscillated backward and forward, and her
     fingers fidgeted with her glove buttons. suddenly, with a plunge, as
     of the swimmer who leaves the bank, she hurried across the road, and
     we heard the sharp clang of the bell.

     "i have seen those symptoms before," said holmes, throwing his
     cigarette into the fire. "oscillation upon the pavement always means
     an affaire de coeur. she would like advice, but is not sure that the
     matter is not too delicate for communication. and yet even here we
     may discriminate. when a woman has been seriously wronged by a man
     she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell
     wire. here we may take it that there is a love matter, but that the
     maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or grieved. but here she
     comes in person to resolve our doubts."

     as he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons
     entered to announce miss mary sutherland, while the lady herself
     loomed behind his small black figure like a full-sailed merchant-man
     behind a tiny pilot boat. sherlock holmes welcomed her with the easy
     courtesy for which he was remarkable, and, having closed the door and
     bowed her into an armchair, he looked her over in the minute and yet
     abstracted fashion which was peculiar to him.

     "do you not find," he said, "that with your short sight it is a
     little trying to do so much typewriting?"

     "i did at first," she answered, "but now i know where the letters are
     without looking." then, suddenly realising the full purport of his
     words, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fear and
     astonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face. "you've heard about
     me, mr. holmes," she cried, "else how could you know all that?"

     "never mind," said holmes, laughing; "it is my business to know
     things. perhaps i have trained myself to see what others overlook. if
     not, why should you come to consult me?"

     "i came to you, sir, because i heard of you from mrs. etherege, whose
     husband you found so easy when the police and everyone had given him
     up for dead. oh, mr. holmes, i wish you would do as much for me. i'm
     not rich, but still i have a hundred a year in my own right, besides
     the little that i make by the machine, and i would give it all to
     know what has become of mr. hosmer angel."

     "why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?" asked sherlock
     holmes, with his finger-tips together and his eyes to the ceiling.

     again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of miss
     mary sutherland. "yes, i did bang out of the house," she said, "for
     it made me angry to see the easy way in which mr. windibank--that is,
     my father--took it all. he would not go to the police, and he would
     not go to you, and so at last, as he would do nothing and kept on
     saying that there was no harm done, it made me mad, and i just on
     with my things and came right away to you."

     "your father," said holmes, "your stepfather, surely, since the name
     is different."

     "yes, my stepfather. i call him father, though it sounds funny, too,
     for he is only five years and two months older than myself."

     "and your mother is alive?"

     "oh, yes, mother is alive and well. i wasn't best pleased, mr.
     holmes, when she married again so soon after father's death, and a
     man who was nearly fifteen years younger than herself. father was a
     plumber in the tottenham court road, and he left a tidy business
     behind him, which mother carried on with mr. hardy, the foreman; but
     when mr. windibank came he made her sell the business, for he was
     very superior, being a traveller in wines. they got £4700 for the
     goodwill and interest, which wasn't near as much as father could have
     got if he had been alive."

     i had expected to see sherlock holmes impatient under this rambling
     and inconsequential narrative, but, on the contrary, he had listened
     with the greatest concentration of attention.

     "your own little income," he asked, "does it come out of the
     business?"

     "oh, no, sir. it is quite separate and was left me by my uncle ned in
     auckland. it is in new zealand stock, paying 4½ per cent. two
     thousand five hundred pounds was the amount, but i can only touch the
     interest."

     "you interest me extremely," said holmes. "and since you draw so
     large a sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into the bargain,
     you no doubt travel a little and indulge yourself in every way. i
     believe that a single lady can get on very nicely upon an income of
     about £60."

     "i could do with much less than that, mr. holmes, but you understand
     that as long as i live at home i don't wish to be a burden to them,
     and so they have the use of the money just while i am staying with
     them. of course, that is only just for the time. mr. windibank draws
     my interest every quarter and pays it over to mother, and i find that
     i can do pretty well with what i earn at typewriting. it brings me
     twopence a sheet, and i can often do from fifteen to twenty sheets in
     a day."

     "you have made your position very clear to me," said holmes. "this is
     my friend, dr. watson, before whom you can speak as freely as before
     myself. kindly tell us now all about your connection with mr. hosmer
     angel."

     a flush stole over miss sutherland's face, and she picked nervously
     at the fringe of her jacket. "i met him first at the gasfitters'
     ball," she said. "they used to send father tickets when he was alive,
     and then afterwards they remembered us, and sent them to mother. mr.
     windibank did not wish us to go. he never did wish us to go anywhere.
     he would get quite mad if i wanted so much as to join a sunday-school
     treat. but this time i was set on going, and i would go; for what
     right had he to prevent? he said the folk were not fit for us to
     know, when all father's friends were to be there. and he said that i
     had nothing fit to wear, when i had my purple plush that i had never
     so much as taken out of the drawer. at last, when nothing else would
     do, he went off to france upon the business of the firm, but we went,
     mother and i, with mr. hardy, who used to be our foreman, and it was
     there i met mr. hosmer angel."

     "i suppose," said holmes, "that when mr. windibank came back from
     france he was very annoyed at your having gone to the ball."

     "oh, well, he was very good about it. he laughed, i remember, and
     shrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denying anything to
     a woman, for she would have her way."

     "i see. then at the gasfitters' ball you met, as i understand, a
     gentleman called mr. hosmer angel."

     "yes, sir. i met him that night, and he called next day to ask if we
     had got home all safe, and after that we met him--that is to say, mr.
     holmes, i met him twice for walks, but after that father came back
     again, and mr. hosmer angel could not come to the house any more."

     "no?"

     "well, you know father didn't like anything of the sort. he wouldn't
     have any visitors if he could help it, and he used to say that a
     woman should be happy in her own family circle. but then, as i used
     to say to mother, a woman wants her own circle to begin with, and i
     had not got mine yet."

     "but how about mr. hosmer angel? did he make no attempt to see you?"

     "well, father was going off to france again in a week, and hosmer
     wrote and said that it would be safer and better not to see each
     other until he had gone. we could write in the meantime, and he used
     to write every day. i took the letters in in the morning, so there
     was no need for father to know."

     "were you engaged to the gentleman at this time?"

     "oh, yes, mr. holmes. we were engaged after the first walk that we
     took. hosmer--mr. angel--was a cashier in an office in leadenhall
     street--and--"

     "what office?"

     "that's the worst of it, mr. holmes, i don't know."

     "where did he live, then?"

     "he slept on the premises."

     "and you don't know his address?"

     "no--except that it was leadenhall street."

     "where did you address your letters, then?"

     "to the leadenhall street post office, to be left till called for. he
     said that if they were sent to the office he would be chaffed by all
     the other clerks about having letters from a lady, so i offered to
     typewrite them, like he did his, but he wouldn't have that, for he
     said that when i wrote them they seemed to come from me, but when
     they were typewritten he always felt that the machine had come
     between us. that will just show you how fond he was of me, mr.
     holmes, and the little things that he would think of."

     "it was most suggestive," said holmes. "it has long been an axiom of
     mine that the little things are infinitely the most important.  can
     you remember any other little things about mr. hosmer angel?"

     "he was a very shy man, mr. holmes. he would rather walk with me in
     the evening than in the daylight, for he said that he hated to be
     conspicuous. very retiring and gentlemanly he was. even his voice was
     gentle. he'd had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, he
     told me, and it had left him with a weak throat, and a hesitating,
     whispering fashion of speech. he was always well dressed, very neat
     and plain, but his eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he wore
     tinted glasses against the glare."

     "well, and what happened when mr. windibank, your stepfather,
     returned to france?"

     "mr. hosmer angel came to the house again and proposed that we should
     marry before father came back. he was in dreadful earnest and made me
     swear, with my hands on the testament, that whatever happened i would
     always be true to him. mother said he was quite right to make me
     swear, and that it was a sign of his passion. mother was all in his
     favour from the first and was even fonder of him than i was. then,
     when they talked of marrying within the week, i began to ask about
     father; but they both said never to mind about father, but just to
     tell him afterwards, and mother said she would make it all right with
     him. i didn't quite like that, mr. holmes. it seemed funny that i
     should ask his leave, as he was only a few years older than me; but i
     didn't want to do anything on the sly, so i wrote to father at
     bordeaux, where the company has its french offices, but the letter
     came back to me on the very morning of the wedding."

     "it missed him, then?"

     "yes, sir; for he had started to england just before it arrived."

     "ha! that was unfortunate. your wedding was arranged, then, for the
     friday. was it to be in church?"

     "yes, sir, but very quietly. it was to be at st. saviour's, near
     king's cross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the st.
     pancras hotel. hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there were two
     of us he put us both into it and stepped himself into a four-wheeler,
     which happened to be the only other cab in the street. we got to the
     church first, and when the four-wheeler drove up we waited for him to
     step out, but he never did, and when the cabman got down from the box
     and looked there was no one there! the cabman said that he could not
     imagine what had become of him, for he had seen him get in with his
     own eyes. that was last friday, mr. holmes, and i have never seen or
     heard anything since then to throw any light upon what became of
     him."

     "it seems to me that you have been very shamefully treated," said
     holmes.

     "oh, no, sir! he was too good and kind to leave me so. why, all the
     morning he was saying to me that, whatever happened, i was to be
     true; and that even if something quite unforeseen occurred to
     separate us, i was always to remember that i was pledged to him, and
     that he would claim his pledge sooner or later. it seemed strange
     talk for a wedding-morning, but what has happened since gives a
     meaning to it."

     "most certainly it does. your own opinion is, then, that some
     unforeseen catastrophe has occurred to him?"

     "yes, sir. i believe that he foresaw some danger, or else he would
     not have talked so. and then i think that what he foresaw happened."

     "but you have no notion as to what it could have been?"

     "none."

     "one more question. how did your mother take the matter?"

     "she was angry, and said that i was never to speak of the matter
     again."

     "and your father? did you tell him?"

     "yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had happened,
     and that i should hear of hosmer again. as he said, what interest
     could anyone have in bringing me to the doors of the church, and then
     leaving me? now, if he had borrowed my money, or if he had married me
     and got my money settled on him, there might be some reason, but
     hosmer was very independent about money and never would look at a
     shilling of mine. and yet, what could have happened? and why could he
     not write? oh, it drives me half-mad to think of it, and i can't
     sleep a wink at night." she pulled a little handkerchief out of her
     muff and began to sob heavily into it.

     "i shall glance into the case for you," said holmes, rising, "and i
     have no doubt that we shall reach some definite result. let the
     weight of the matter rest upon me now, and do not let your mind dwell
     upon it further. above all, try to let mr. hosmer angel vanish from
     your memory, as he has done from your life."

     "then you don't think i'll see him again?"

     "i fear not."

     "then what has happened to him?"

     "you will leave that question in my hands. i should like an accurate
     description of him and any letters of his which you can spare."

     "i advertised for him in last saturday's chronicle," said she. "here
     is the slip and here are four letters from him."

     "thank you. and your address?"

     "no. 31 lyon place, camberwell."

     "mr. angel's address you never had, i understand. where is your
     father's place of business?"

     "he travels for westhouse & marbank, the great claret importers of
     fenchurch street."

     "thank you. you have made your statement very clearly. you will leave
     the papers here, and remember the advice which i have given you. let
     the whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow it to affect
     your life."

     "you are very kind, mr. holmes, but i cannot do that. i shall be true
     to hosmer. he shall find me ready when he comes back."

     for all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was
     something noble in the simple faith of our visitor which compelled
     our respect. she laid her little bundle of papers upon the table and
     went her way, with a promise to come again whenever she might be
     summoned.

     sherlock holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his fingertips
     still pressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him, and
     his gaze directed upward to the ceiling. then he took down from the
     rack the old and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a counsellor,
     and, having lit it, he leaned back in his chair, with the thick blue
     cloud-wreaths spinning up from him, and a look of infinite languor in
     his face.

     "quite an interesting study, that maiden," he observed. "i found her
     more interesting than her little problem, which, by the way, is
     rather a trite one. you will find parallel cases, if you consult my
     index, in andover in '77, and there was something of the sort at the
     hague last year. old as is the idea, however, there were one or two
     details which were new to me. but the maiden herself was most
     instructive."

     "you appeared to read a good deal upon her which was quite invisible
     to me," i remarked.

     "not invisible but unnoticed, watson. you did not know where to look,
     and so you missed all that was important. i can never bring you to
     realise the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails,
     or the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace. now, what did you
     gather from that woman's appearance? describe it."

     "well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with a
     feather of a brickish red. her jacket was black, with black beads
     sewn upon it, and a fringe of little black jet ornaments. her dress
     was brown, rather darker than coffee colour, with a little purple
     plush at the neck and sleeves. her gloves were greyish and were worn
     through at the right forefinger. her boots i didn't observe. she had
     small round, hanging gold earrings, and a general air of being fairly
     well-to-do in a vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way."

     sherlock holmes clapped his hands softly together and chuckled.

     "'pon my word, watson, you are coming along wonderfully. you have
     really done very well indeed. it is true that you have missed
     everything of importance, but you have hit upon the method, and you
     have a quick eye for colour. never trust to general impressions, my
     boy, but concentrate yourself upon details. my first glance is always
     at a woman's sleeve. in a man it is perhaps better first to take the
     knee of the trouser. as you observe, this woman had plush upon her
     sleeves, which is a most useful material for showing traces. the
     double line a little above the wrist, where the typewritist presses
     against the table, was beautifully defined. the sewing-machine, of
     the hand type, leaves a similar mark, but only on the left arm, and
     on the side of it farthest from the thumb, instead of being right
     across the broadest part, as this was. i then glanced at her face,
     and, observing the dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, i
     ventured a remark upon short sight and typewriting, which seemed to
     surprise her."

     "it surprised me."

     "but, surely, it was obvious. i was then much surprised and
     interested on glancing down to observe that, though the boots which
     she was wearing were not unlike each other, they were really odd
     ones; the one having a slightly decorated toe-cap, and the other a
     plain one. one was buttoned only in the two lower buttons out of
     five, and the other at the first, third, and fifth. now, when you see
     that a young lady, otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from home
     with odd boots, half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say that
     she came away in a hurry."

     "and what else?" i asked, keenly interested, as i always was, by my
     friend's incisive reasoning.

     "i noted, in passing, that she had written a note before leaving home
     but after being fully dressed. you observed that her right glove was
     torn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently see that both
     glove and finger were stained with violet ink. she had written in a
     hurry and dipped her pen too deep. it must have been this morning, or
     the mark would not remain clear upon the finger. all this is amusing,
     though rather elementary, but i must go back to business, watson.
     would you mind reading me the advertised description of mr. hosmer
     angel?"

     i held the little printed slip to the light.

     "missing," it said, "on the morning of the fourteenth, a gentleman
     named hosmer angel. about five ft. seven in. in height; strongly
     built, sallow complexion, black hair, a little bald in the centre,
     bushy, black side-whiskers and moustache; tinted glasses, slight
     infirmity of speech. was dressed, when last seen, in black frock-coat
     faced with silk, black waistcoat, gold albert chain, and grey harris
     tweed trousers, with brown gaiters over elastic-sided boots. known to
     have been employed in an office in leadenhall street. anybody
     bringing--"

     "that will do," said holmes. "as to the letters," he continued,
     glancing over them, "they are very commonplace. absolutely no clue in
     them to mr. angel, save that he quotes balzac once. there is one
     remarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike you."

     "they are typewritten," i remarked.

     "not only that, but the signature is typewritten. look at the neat
     little 'hosmer angel' at the bottom. there is a date, you see, but no
     superscription except leadenhall street, which is rather vague. the
     point about the signature is very suggestive--in fact, we may call it
     conclusive."

     "of what?"

     "my dear fellow, is it possible you do not see how strongly it bears
     upon the case?"

     "i cannot say that i do unless it were that he wished to be able to
     deny his signature if an action for breach of promise were
     instituted."

     "no, that was not the point. however, i shall write two letters,
     which should settle the matter. one is to a firm in the city, the
     other is to the young lady's stepfather, mr. windibank, asking him
     whether he could meet us here at six o'clock tomorrow evening. it is
     just as well that we should do business with the male relatives. and
     now, doctor, we can do nothing until the answers to those letters
     come, so we may put our little problem upon the shelf for the
     interim."

     i had had so many reasons to believe in my friend's subtle powers of
     reasoning and extraordinary energy in action that i felt that he must
     have some solid grounds for the assured and easy demeanour with which
     he treated the singular mystery which he had been called upon to
     fathom. once only had i known him to fail, in the case of the king of
     bohemia and of the irene adler photograph; but when i looked back to
     the weird business of the sign of four, and the extraordinary
     circumstances connected with the study in scarlet, i felt that it
     would be a strange tangle indeed which he could not unravel.

     i left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe, with the
     conviction that when i came again on the next evening i would find
     that he held in his hands all the clues which would lead up to the
     identity of the disappearing bridegroom of miss mary sutherland.

     a professional case of great gravity was engaging my own attention at
     the time, and the whole of next day i was busy at the bedside of the
     sufferer. it was not until close upon six o'clock that i found myself
     free and was able to spring into a hansom and drive to baker street,
     half afraid that i might be too late to assist at the dénouement of
     the little mystery. i found sherlock holmes alone, however, half
     asleep, with his long, thin form curled up in the recesses of his
     armchair. a formidable array of bottles and test-tubes, with the
     pungent cleanly smell of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spent
     his day in the chemical work which was so dear to him.

     "well, have you solved it?" i asked as i entered.

     "yes. it was the bisulphate of baryta."

     "no, no, the mystery!" i cried.

     "oh, that! i thought of the salt that i have been working upon. there
     was never any mystery in the matter, though, as i said yesterday,
     some of the details are of interest. the only drawback is that there
     is no law, i fear, that can touch the scoundrel."

     "who was he, then, and what was his object in deserting miss
     sutherland?"

     the question was hardly out of my mouth, and holmes had not yet
     opened his lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in the
     passage and a tap at the door.

     "this is the girl's stepfather, mr. james windibank," said holmes.
     "he has written to me to say that he would be here at six. come in!"

     the man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some thirty
     years of age, clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with a bland,
     insinuating manner, and a pair of wonderfully sharp and penetrating
     grey eyes. he shot a questioning glance at each of us, placed his
     shiny top-hat upon the sideboard, and with a slight bow sidled down
     into the nearest chair.

     "good-evening, mr. james windibank," said holmes. "i think that this
     typewritten letter is from you, in which you made an appointment with
     me for six o'clock?"

     "yes, sir. i am afraid that i am a little late, but i am not quite my
     own master, you know. i am sorry that miss sutherland has troubled
     you about this little matter, for i think it is far better not to
     wash linen of the sort in public. it was quite against my wishes that
     she came, but she is a very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may
     have noticed, and she is not easily controlled when she has made up
     her mind on a point. of course, i did not mind you so much, as you
     are not connected with the official police, but it is not pleasant to
     have a family misfortune like this noised abroad. besides, it is a
     useless expense, for how could you possibly find this hosmer angel?"

     "on the contrary," said holmes quietly; "i have every reason to
     believe that i will succeed in discovering mr. hosmer angel."

     mr. windibank gave a violent start and dropped his gloves. "i am
     delighted to hear it," he said.

     "it is a curious thing," remarked holmes, "that a typewriter has
     really quite as much individuality as a man's handwriting. unless
     they are quite new, no two of them write exactly alike. some letters
     get more worn than others, and some wear only on one side. now, you
     remark in this note of yours, mr. windibank, that in every case there
     is some little slurring over of the 'e,' and a slight defect in the
     tail of the 'r.' there are fourteen other characteristics, but those
     are the more obvious."

     "we do all our correspondence with this machine at the office, and no
     doubt it is a little worn," our visitor answered, glancing keenly at
     holmes with his bright little eyes.

     "and now i will show you what is really a very interesting study, mr.
     windibank," holmes continued. "i think of writing another little
     monograph some of these days on the typewriter and its relation to
     crime. it is a subject to which i have devoted some little attention.
     i have here four letters which purport to come from the missing man.
     they are all typewritten. in each case, not only are the 'e's'
     slurred and the 'r's' tailless, but you will observe, if you care to
     use my magnifying lens, that the fourteen other characteristics to
     which i have alluded are there as well."

     mr. windibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his hat. "i
     cannot waste time over this sort of fantastic talk, mr. holmes," he
     said. "if you can catch the man, catch him, and let me know when you
     have done it."

     "certainly," said holmes, stepping over and turning the key in the
     door. "i let you know, then, that i have caught him!"

     "what! where?" shouted mr. windibank, turning white to his lips and
     glancing about him like a rat in a trap.

     "oh, it won't do--really it won't," said holmes suavely. "there is no
     possible getting out of it, mr. windibank. it is quite too
     transparent, and it was a very bad compliment when you said that it
     was impossible for me to solve so simple a question. that's right!
     sit down and let us talk it over."

     our visitor collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and a glitter
     of moisture on his brow. "it--it's not actionable," he stammered.

     "i am very much afraid that it is not. but between ourselves,
     windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless a trick in a
     petty way as ever came before me. now, let me just run over the
     course of events, and you will contradict me if i go wrong."

     the man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon his
     breast, like one who is utterly crushed. holmes stuck his feet up on
     the corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning back with his hands in his
     pockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed, than to us.

     "the man married a woman very much older than himself for her money,"
     said he, "and he enjoyed the use of the money of the daughter as long
     as she lived with them. it was a considerable sum, for people in
     their position, and the loss of it would have made a serious
     difference. it was worth an effort to preserve it. the daughter was
     of a good, amiable disposition, but affectionate and warm-hearted in
     her ways, so that it was evident that with her fair personal
     advantages, and her little income, she would not be allowed to remain
     single long. now her marriage would mean, of course, the loss of a
     hundred a year, so what does her stepfather do to prevent it? he
     takes the obvious course of keeping her at home and forbidding her to
     seek the company of people of her own age. but soon he found that
     that would not answer forever. she became restive, insisted upon her
     rights, and finally announced her positive intention of going to a
     certain ball. what does her clever stepfather do then? he conceives
     an idea more creditable to his head than to his heart. with the
     connivance and assistance of his wife he disguised himself, covered
     those keen eyes with tinted glasses, masked the face with a moustache
     and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear voice into an
     insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of the girl's short
     sight, he appears as mr. hosmer angel, and keeps off other lovers by
     making love himself."

     "it was only a joke at first," groaned our visitor. "we never thought
     that she would have been so carried away."

     "very likely not. however that may be, the young lady was very
     decidedly carried away, and, having quite made up her mind that her
     stepfather was in france, the suspicion of treachery never for an
     instant entered her mind. she was flattered by the gentleman's
     attentions, and the effect was increased by the loudly expressed
     admiration of her mother. then mr. angel began to call, for it was
     obvious that the matter should be pushed as far as it would go if a
     real effect were to be produced. there were meetings, and an
     engagement, which would finally secure the girl's affections from
     turning towards anyone else. but the deception could not be kept up
     forever. these pretended journeys to france were rather cumbrous. the
     thing to do was clearly to bring the business to an end in such a
     dramatic manner that it would leave a permanent impression upon the
     young lady's mind and prevent her from looking upon any other suitor
     for some time to come. hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon a
     testament, and hence also the allusions to a possibility of something
     happening on the very morning of the wedding. james windibank wished
     miss sutherland to be so bound to hosmer angel, and so uncertain as
     to his fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would not
     listen to another man. as far as the church door he brought her, and
     then, as he could go no farther, he conveniently vanished away by the
     old trick of stepping in at one door of a four-wheeler and out at the
     other. i think that was the chain of events, mr. windibank!"

     our visitor had recovered something of his assurance while holmes had
     been talking, and he rose from his chair now with a cold sneer upon
     his pale face.

     "it may be so, or it may not, mr. holmes," said he, "but if you are
     so very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you who
     are breaking the law now, and not me. i have done nothing actionable
     from the first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay
     yourself open to an action for assault and illegal constraint."

     "the law cannot, as you say, touch you," said holmes, unlocking and
     throwing open the door, "yet there never was a man who deserved
     punishment more. if the young lady has a brother or a friend, he
     ought to lay a whip across your shoulders. by jove!" he continued,
     flushing up at the sight of the bitter sneer upon the man's face, "it
     is not part of my duties to my client, but here's a hunting crop
     handy, and i think i shall just treat myself to--" he took two swift
     steps to the whip, but before he could grasp it there was a wild
     clatter of steps upon the stairs, the heavy hall door banged, and
     from the window we could see mr. james windibank running at the top
     of his speed down the road.

     "there's a cold-blooded scoundrel!" said holmes, laughing, as he
     threw himself down into his chair once more. "that fellow will rise
     from crime to crime until he does something very bad, and ends on a
     gallows. the case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid of
     interest."

     "i cannot now entirely see all the steps of your reasoning," i
     remarked.

     "well, of course it was obvious from the first that this mr. hosmer
     angel must have some strong object for his curious conduct, and it
     was equally clear that the only man who really profited by the
     incident, as far as we could see, was the stepfather. then the fact
     that the two men were never together, but that the one always
     appeared when the other was away, was suggestive. so were the tinted
     spectacles and the curious voice, which both hinted at a disguise, as
     did the bushy whiskers. my suspicions were all confirmed by his
     peculiar action in typewriting his signature, which, of course,
     inferred that his handwriting was so familiar to her that she would
     recognise even the smallest sample of it. you see all these isolated
     facts, together with many minor ones, all pointed in the same
     direction."

     "and how did you verify them?"

     "having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration. i knew
     the firm for which this man worked. having taken the printed
     description, i eliminated everything from it which could be the
     result of a disguise--the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and i
     sent it to the firm, with a request that they would inform me whether
     it answered to the description of any of their travellers. i had
     already noticed the peculiarities of the typewriter, and i wrote to
     the man himself at his business address asking him if he would come
     here. as i expected, his reply was typewritten and revealed the same
     trivial but characteristic defects. the same post brought me a letter
     from westhouse & marbank, of fenchurch street, to say that the
     description tallied in every respect with that of their employee,
     james windibank. voilà tout!"

     "and miss sutherland?"

     "if i tell her she will not believe me. you may remember the old
     persian saying, 'there is danger for him who taketh the tiger cub,
     and danger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.' there is
     as much sense in hafiz as in horace, and as much knowledge of the
     world."









     ----------
     this text is provided to you "as-is" without any warranty. no
     warranties of any kind, expressed or implied, are made to you as to
     the text or any medium it may be on, including but not limited to
     warranties of merchantablity or fitness for a particular purpose.

     this text was formatted from various free ascii and html variants.
     see http://sherlock-holm.es for an electronic form of this text and
     additional information about it.

     this text comes from the collection's version 3.1.






